# An investigation into how food production has been affected by Covid-19

In this project we looked at the effect Coronovirus (Covid-19) has had on agriculture, and particularly food production in the UK. We began by analysing the prices of fruits and vegetables produced in the UK, and saw how this has been affected by the lack of seasonal workers and imports from other countries. Additionally, we looked at the production of meat and milk in the UK which is a mainly automated process when compared to the manual labour required for fruit picking. 

In investigating food production, we looked at the impact of seasonal labour. In early March there began mass flight cancelations by major airlines which was followed by a government lockdown on March 23. As a result, compared to the previous year’s 137,538, the average number of non-British nationals arriving in the UK is 2551. This drop corresponds to the decrease in seasonal workers as a result of quarantine measures. Similarly, you can see an increase in search for seasonal jobs with phrases like “fruiting picking jobs'' and “Pick for Britain”, the government-based scheme to encourage a UK based workforce to meet demands, peaking in popularity in April and June.  Despite the efforts and increase in jobs advertised, recruitment companies such as Pro Force have come out saying they still require filling 20,000 to 30,000 vacancies normally employing seasonal workers.  In response, on June 3rd the UK government has published guidelines allowing farmers, labour providers and agencies to employ seasonal workers from overseas who will be exempt from the government 14-day quarantine. The weekly shipping indicator is related to the imports and exports of goods in the UK. There is a 17% average decrease for weekly cargo visits and an average 7% decrease in all weekly ship visits compared to 2019. The decline in both seasonal workers and imports and exports can be linked to the increase in cost of seasonal fruits.

For fruit prices we chose to focus on Bramley’s Seedling Apples and Strawberries since they require seasonal workers to be harvested. According to the Office for National Statistics 90% of the UK’s seasonal workers come from the EU. While the numbers will have decreased due to Brexit, Covid-19 will have presented a much more significant loss in fruit pickers. As seen in the graph of Bramley’s Seedling Apple prices, there has been a major increase since March when lockdown began in the UK. With regards to Strawberries data also showed an increase in the price of Strawberries in comparison to previous years. This is likely due to the lack of seasonal workers in the UK due to Covid-19 and the decreased supply available.  

Milk and Meat production are mainly mechanised processes. As such they are unlikely to be affected by seasonal workers having to leave the country due to quarantine measures. This is shown in the graphs in the presentation and our dataset. If we look at the graph for the volume of milk produced we can see that the total volume of milk produced seems to have a periodic pattern, dipping in February and peaking in May. If  we compare the months of March, April, and May (the last data entries) with previous years we see that it is noticeably lower than that of the trend line in previous cases indicating that the price of milk has fallen. Comparing this with the volume of milk produced, we can deduce that it isn’t because the supply is higher than the demand. As such we can perhaps conjecture that the decrease in price for the months of quarantine is due to government incentives to help people be able to buy basic groceries whilst on furlough pay, or perhaps because of the increased number of people staying at home which results in an increase in milk purchases. This is contrary to the net margins predicted.
